---
permalink: /about/
title: "About"
---

The working group focuses on computational imaging for radio astronomy in
relation to the Square Kilometre Array (SKA) project, the largest radio
interferometer set to deploy its first phase in 2024. This project, which
involves high-performance computing to process 7.2 Tb/s of raw data, brings
together experts from Paris-Saclay across various disciplines. Participants
include astrophysicists and researchers in digital sciences, data science, and
artificial intelligence. Several laboratories are involved, such as L2S, SATIE,
CEA, and IAS, contributing expertise in statistical signal processing, algorithm
optimization, data calibration, and high-performance computing. The group aims
to foster collaboration through regular seminars and a funded Master’s
internship to explore advanced computational imaging and statistical methods

## [L2S](https://l2s.centralesupelec.fr/)

Signals and Systems Laboratory has recognised expertise in statistical signal
processing, antenna processing, inverse problems and computational imaging. The
laboratory has worked on the development of new statistical signal processing
methods, Bayesian and variational approaches, robust statistics and statistical
learning for image estimation and reconstruction, particularly in inverse
problems. The laboratory is involved in the SKA project through the ANR Dark-Era
(2021-2025) project, which focuses on HPC simulation for the design of a
heterogeneouscomputing cluster for SKA, as well as several theses on data
calibration and the acceleration of image reconstruction algorithms and the
ECLAT (Extreme Computing Laboratory for Astronomical Telescopes) joint
laboratory

## [SATIE](https://satie.ens-paris-saclay.fr/)

SATIE draws on its expertise in both signal processing and
algorithm-architecture matching to meet the computational challenges of
new-generation radio telescopes . In signal processing, the work focuses on
imaging techniques, dynamic imaging, calibration, the search for optimal
geometries, and the switching of sub-networks and informed learning. Work on
matching algorithms to architecture aims to better understand and scale up
algorithms. Working closely with L2S, SATIE brings this dual expertise to LabCom
ECLAT and the ANR Dark-Era consortium. SATIE is committed to the application
side of its work, and is developing a collaboration with the Nançay Observatory
(ORN), where NenuFAR, an SKA precursor, is located.

## [CEA/Dedip](https://irfu.cea.fr/dedip/) & [CEA/Dap](https://irfu.cea.fr/dap/)

Three Irfu departments at the CEA are or will be involved in SKA: the DPhP
(Department of Particle Physics), the DAp (Department of Astrophysics) and the
DEDIP (Department of Electronics, Detectors and Computing for Physics). Radio
observations are of interest to several Irfu teams studying cosmic ray sources
and high-energyphotons, cosmology, HI (neutral atomic hydrogen) readings at 21cm
and the study of compact objects. DEDIP and DAp are also involved in developing
algorithmic methods for processing visibilities and reconstructing sky maps, as
well as designing the architecture of the SKA Regional Centres and
adapting/optimising the use of High-Performance Computing (HPC) resources in
this context.

## [IAS](https://www.ias.u-psud.fr/)

The IAS cosmology team is participating in the preparation of the SKA via its
Cosmic Magnetism and Epoch of Reionisation scientific working groups and via the
exploitation of its precursors (notably HERA). The researchers involved in this
WG are developing methods for analysing SKA radio data based on Fourier
analysis, component separation and inverse problem solving using Bayesian and
machine learning methods. These methods have been developed not only to extract
physical information from the data, but also to facilitate calibration and the
processing of polluting signals such as radio interference. This involves, for
example, reconstructing missing information from sparse data or extracting the
topology of such maps. The IAS is also involved in the design of SKAO's French
data centre (SRC), as well as institutionally via the Observatoire des Sciences
de l'Univers de l'Université Paris-Saclay and the scientific council of the
SKA-LOFAR Specific Action.
